Hello everyone.
Welcome back to Exploring Quantum Physics.
I'm Charles Clark.
We're going to conclude this lecture by
another application of pertubation theory
to a problem that can be solved exactly,
important problem.
But this will show you how you can use
pertubation theory to test against
a result to see if you're getting
the right answer in the leading order.
We now return to a problem
that we studied previously,
the spectra of the isotopes of hydrogen.
But we're going to approach it from
the standpoint of perturbation theory
rather than a direct solution
of the Schröder equation.
So this is a fairly important problem,
the history of science,
and it's a useful testing ground for
perturbation theory because we do have
available to us an exact solution.
So we can compare perturbation
theory in the limit.
And then, perturbation theory also gives
us some guidance as to how to approach
the problem of multi-electron atoms, where
the isotope shifts are also important.
But where there typically is not
an easily tractable solution available.
Certainly not an exact solution.
And the basic idea,
as you recall on perturbation theory,
there's a small parameter,
and we take that to be the ratio of
the electron mass to the nuclear mass.
So let's start.
We have the electronic coordinates,
the mass, the position, the momentum,
the designated the the same for
the nucleus.
Mass capital M, and its own position.
It's a two particle system.
The Hamiltonian consists of
the electron kinetic energy,
the nuclear kinetic energy, and
then the interaction potential.
Now we split this up into
two pieces shown here.
The one in the red box contains
the electron kinetic energy and
the interaction energy.
And then the term in the blue box
is the nuclear kinetic energy.
The energy of motion of the nucleus.
And we have chosen to extract
the small parameter by this method so
that we get an equation that looks like
the beginning of the perturbation theory.
We have a 0 total Hamiltonian,
and then a small quantity,
which we'll conventionally call
lambda times another potential.
And here are the values of that small
parameter for the several stable or
nearly stable isotopes of hydrogen.
A protium is the name for
electron bound to a proton,
mass one, mass proton mass, deuterium,
electron bound to a deuteron, and
tritium, the electron bound to a triton.
Nuclear mass is roughly in the ratio one,
two, three.
To tell you the truth,
I can never remember the equations
of perturbation theory.
I always return to first principles,
which are defined by this equation.
And the basic idea is you have
some model Hamiltonian and
then a correction to it, which is
proportional to the parameter lambda.
And then both the wave function and
the energy are to be expanded
in powers of lambda.
And so you just put these things in and
expand away.
And it's very easy to
generate the various terms.
So here's the zeroth order.
Here's the term that's first
order in lambda and so on.
Now in previous examples
on perturbation theory,
we were focused mostly on
the second order of energy shifts.
But in this case, we have a concrete
application of the first order energy,
which happens to not to
vanish in this system and
gives the leading correction
to the energy levels.
So back to our defining equations,
now let's do an explicit construction
of the zeroth order solution.
So the value of our coupling
concept lambda goes to zero in
the limit of nuclear
mass goes to infinity.
So we just take that limit, and
we choose the coordinate origin to
be the position of the nucleus.
Then we get our h nought solely in
terms of the variables of the electron.
And we're going to solve this equation.
So now a brief in-video quiz
to give you an opportunity to
understand what this
equation really means.
So, I hope that in thinking about that,
you came to the conclusion that E0,
well, first of all,
that it is an energy of the hydrogen
atom with an infinite nuclear mass.
And that, in fact,
it can be any such energy.
In other words, although perturbation
theory is often applied to the ground
states of systems,
it's not restricted to those.
And, in this case, we can apply to any
Eigenfunction of the original Hamiltonian.
That is, to a state with any principal
quantum number greater than or
equal to one.
This is very important because it
allows us to calculate the isotope
shift of a transition wavelength or
a transition frequency,
which is the difference in the isotope
shifts of two different energy levels.
So it's really critical that we be able
to apply perturbation theory to any
level in order to get
a result that's useful.
So, we have available to us the E0, and
the sine 0 can be obtained by
solving the infinite mass equation.
So now we are to evaluate the first
order energy, and so, there it is,
it's the nuclear kinetic energy evaluated
over an electronic wave function.
How are we going to handle that?
Well, it's always convenient to choose
a good coordinate reference frame.
And if we use the center of mass
frame then we have this very
useful identity that the momentum
of the nucleus is equal and
opposite to the momentum of the electron.
So now we've converted that
expectation value into one
that involves electronic coordinates only.
And what's more,
by use of the virial theorem,
we don't even need to do
an explicit calculation of that
matrix element because we
showed previously that for
the 1 over r potential,
the expectation value of
the average kinetic energy,
which is what this is,
is just equal and
opposite to the total energy.
So, now we can complete the calculation,
the first order in little m over big M.
So, the energy is just E0 + lambda E1, and
E1 is minus E0, so we get this result for
the energy level shift.
So at this point maybe you
should pause and verify that
these two results are in
agreement to first order in
the ratio of electrons to nuclear mass,
which is the goal of the exercise.
So this use of the virial theorem
is something that is also takes
place in modern calculations
of the of many electron atoms.
Because typically,
one doesn't have any exact answers and
perturbation theory is
the only way to make progress.
Okay, that's it for this lecture,
hope to see you again soon.